In this lecture, you'll learn about OSPF areas. As you learned already with our Link State routing
protocols, every router learns the full picture
of it's part of the network, including every router,
its interfaces, and what they connect to, and this can cause issues in large networks. Because every router knows
about every link, there is going to be a lot of routes in its routing table and that can take up too much
memory.
Also, if there's a change in the network, like a new link being added or a link going down, that causes
all routers to reconverge which takes time and CPU resources. And the larger the network is,
the bigger impact that this is going to have. So to mitigate against this, OSPF supports a hierarchical design,
which segments large networks into smaller areas.
Each router maintains full information about its own area, but only summary information about other areas.
So the routers are going to have less routes in their routing table and if a new link comes up or goes
down in another area, it's not going to affect that router.
You'll see how that works later,
when I show you an
example later in this lecture.
So with our areas, we have a two level hierarchy. At the top level,
We've got the transit area, also known as the backbone or Area 0.
It does not generally contain end users when we've got a multiarea network. And then we've got our regular areas,
also known as our nonbackbone areas, which hang below Area 0.
They're used to connect end users to the transit area. By default,
all transit traffic goes through the transit area.
So you see the example diagram here, we've got Area 0, and Area 1 and Area 2 are hanging off of there.
Any traffic between other areas, not Area 0, always has to go through Area 0. We can't
have traffic going directly between Area 1 and Area 2.
Now, multiple areas are really only required if you've got a larger network.
If you've got a small network, there's less destination networks in there, there's less routes.
So, it's not a problem
if our routers know about all of those different routes. In that case, we don't need the hierarchical
design, and all routers can be in Area 0.
When you do have a single area design, it's always going to be Area 0. Later on if your network grows
and you want to go to a multiarea design,
this makes it really easy to migrate. So our configuration for configuring our different areas,
the area is configured at the interface level with the network command.
You see the example here, we've got network 10.0.0.0, a wildcard mask 0.0.255.255
area 0.
So, any interfaces on this router which have got an IP address that falls within that range will be enabled
for OSPF and put in Area 0. For a router to form an adjacency,
its neighbor on the other side of the link must be configured to be in the same area.
If you've got an area mismatch, the adjacency isn't going to come up and the routers are not going to
share routes with each other.
Moving on to our different router types.
First off, we've got our backbone routers. A backbone router is a router where all its interfaces are in
Area 0,
so this forms part of the transit area. With OSPF, routers maintain a full Link State Database (LSDB) of other routers
and links in their own area.
So, your backbone routers will have the full Link State Database (LSDB) for all of the other links that are also in
Area 0. Whenever an OSPF route is received from a neighbor and that neighbor is in the same area,
it will show up in the routing table as an intra area
route.
You see in the example 'show ip route' output here,
all the different types that are shown in bold are different types of OSPF routes.
We can have intra area routes, which means the destination network is in the same area, an inter area route,
where it's in a different area, or an external route,
meaning it was redistributed into OSPF. So the example here, I can see we've got 3 routes,
the prefix for all of them is 'O',
so these are all intra area routes, received from the same area.
The next type of router we've got is the ABR, our Area Border Router. Routers which have interfaces and multiple
areas are ABRs. So you see the example here, I've highlighted the routers in red.
I've got a router on the left here, which has got one interface in Area 0 and another interface in Area 1.
And our other ABR has got an interface in Area 0 and another interface in Area 2. The characteristics
of the ABRs, they separate the flooding zones.
This is what really segregates our network into the different areas and compartmentalizes our network.
So if we have a link goes up or goes down in that area, it's going to keep the information just in
that one area. It doesn't impact our other areas. You'll see how that works in a second, when I show you
the example. The ABR is also where we always do our summarization in OSPF.
Say that again, in OSPF, summarization is always done on your ABRs. It functions regularly as the
source for default routes for other normal areas, normal routers in our normal areas, and it maintains the
Link State Database (LSDB) for each area with which it is connected.
So if I go back to the slide, you see the ABR on the left here, it's going to have the
full Link State Database (LSDB) for Area 0, so it knows about all the individual networks in Area 0, and it also has the full Link
State Database (LSDB) for Area 1. Our ABR on the right here, it will have the full LSDB for Area 0
and for Area 2, but it only has summary information for Area 1. Ideal design is to have each ABR connected
to two areas only, the backbone and another normal area. An important point is that your ABRs do
not automatically summarize. You need to do this manually, and if you don't manually configure summarization,
all routes will be flooded everywhere, so the network will basically behave like it was all in one big area.
So again, the point of doing our multiple areas is for larger networks, takes up less resources,
puts less load on the routers. But you don't need to just configure the different areas, you also need
to configure summarization on ABRs to really get any benefit from it.
So looking at how we're going to configure it here, R2 is our ABR. It's got an interface in
Area 0, which is FastEthernet1/0 two and FastEthernet0/0 is in Area 1. At global config,
we say 'router ospf 1', and then 'network 10.1.0.0 0.0.255.255 area 0', so that will put
interface FastEthernet1/0 into Area 0, and then 'network 10.0.0.0 0.0.255.255'
goes into Area 1, that is FastEthernet0/0. Then to get the benefit of our different areas, we need to
do so summarization on the ABR. So, you notice that we've got all of our networks over here on the left in
Area 0. I've got 10.1.1.0/24, 10.1.0.0/24,
so all the networks in the left begin with 10.1. They're all 10.1.X.X/24 networks,
so I can summarize those into 10.1.0.0/16. The command to do that, the routes are
in Area 0,
so I say, 'area 0 range 10.1.0.0 255.255.0.0'. And over in the right hand side
of the network in Area 1, my routes there are 10.0.0.0/24, 10.0.1.0/24,
and 10.0.2.0/24.
So all of the networks over in the right, they all begin with 10.0 and they're /24s.
Rather than advertising all of those individual /24 networks over to Area 0 on the left, I'm going
to summarize it to a single /16 route.
So that command I enter is 'area 1' because it's over in Area 1, 'range 10.0.0.0 255.255.0.0'.
The effect that you'll get from this now is R1 over in Area 0, rather than having routes
to 10.0.0.0/24, 10.0.1.0/24, and 10.0.2.0/24,
it just has a single summary route for 10.0.0.0/16.
So there's a less routes on R1, so that takes up less resources on the router. The other benefit
you get from this is let's say that the 10.0.0.0/24 link goes down. Well, all of
my other routers that are in Area 1 will have to reconverge to see if they can find a better path to get there.
So R3 and R4 will have to recalculate, they'll have to do work to update their routing table
about the 10.0.0.0/24 network going down. But if you look at it from
the point of view of R1, well its summary route still stays the same. If any of these individual
routes here go down, our 10.0.0.0/16 route is still good. So if we have an outage
in a different area, it doesn't affect the routers that are in this area. So less routes in your routers,
so it takes up less memory, and also outages, the impact is confined to just that one area, so it takes
up less CPU resources on your routers as well. So that's why we want to have multi areas when
we've got larger networks. When we look in the routing table, our inter area route,
so a route that was a learned from an ABR which is in another area, will show up as type 'O IA'
for inter area routes.
So you see the example output here,
I've got a couple of intra area routes.
The bottom two destinations are within the same area as this router, and I've got an inter area route
which is in another area, and inter area routes are always learned from an ABR. They're the border
between our areas and they're where we do our summarization. The next type of router is a normal area router.
This is a router where all of its interfaces are just in one normal area.
So you can see highlighted in red on the left,
I got 3 routers which are Area 1 routers. All of their interfaces in the Area 1 and I've got an
Area 2 router over here on the right.
Again, these routers will maintain the full Link State Database (LSDB) for the areas which they're a member of.
So all the Area 1 routers will have the full LSDB for Area 1. They will have summary routes for Area 0
and Area 2 that they learned from the ABR. Our Area 2 router will have the full LSDB for Area 2,
summary routes for Area 1 and Area 0. Our last type of router is an ASBR, an Autonomous System Boundary Router.
So ABR is an Area Border Router, ASBR is Autonomous System Boundary Router. What and ASBR is
it means that on that router, it's running OSPF and we're redistributing from another source into OSPF.
So maybe, we're also running EIGRP or RIP on that router. We're taking our EIGRP or RIP routes and we're
redistributing them into OSPF, so they'll also be advertised through our OSPF neighbors, or maybe it's
a static route that we're redistributing into OSPF. So again, an ASBR, it just means we're redistributing
into OSPF on that router. Our redistributed routes show up as external route. So an external route
does not mean it's outside this enterprise, outside this organization. It literally means it was redistributed
into OSPF and if you look at the routing table, this will show up as a type 'O*E' either E1 or E2 for an external route.
So where it says 'O', that means it was an intra area route, the destination is in the same area,
'O IA' is an inter area route, it's from another area learned by an ABR, and 'O*E2 means it was redistributed
into OSPF.
Okay.
So that is our OSPF areas.
I'll see you in the next lecture for lab demo.